---
title: "How to take a technical interview?"
date: "2021-11-25T18:30:00.000Z"
description: "Few tips and tricks to improve your interviewing skill,"
---

Technical interviews are hard for both interviewer and interviewee. After taking
hundreds of interviews. I have some tips to make the interview process bit
better.

## Pre-interview

Before you step into the interview room (or join a zoom call), there are few
things to keep in mind.

**Know what you are interviewing for**

This might seem straightforward, but I have been part of interviews where the
interviewer wasn't sure what he was hiring for. It could be true for large
organizations where the exact role is not known to everyone. Even in that case
at least make sure you know what criteria you are evaluating for. This leads to
my next point.

**Don't judge for too many criteria**

In a single interview round, don't try to judge too many parameters. For eg.
let's say you are interviewing for a frontend role, don't judge CSS design
skills and JS programming in the same round. Define your interview rounds such
that you are only judging 2-3 criteria at once.

**Validate your questions with peers**

While coming up with questions for the interview. Validate the questions with
your peers. Check how easy it is for them to understand your question. How much
time it would take them to solve the problem.

**Don't ask a business domain-specific question**

We might be tempted to ask questions specific to our business domain. If your
company is into e-commerce, using business-specific jargon might throw them off.
This is also hard to validate among your peers because they will be accustomed
to the jargon.

**Avoid giving home assignments**

Giving take-home assignments might be difficult for the candidates. They will be
attending other interviews. They will have to do assignments/tasks from every
company they have applied to. Along with this, they would also do their regular
work.

Giving tasks for 1-2 hours might be a better solution. Though this isn't perfect
either. Due to the limited amount of time, it would be difficult to give a
real-world problem.

**Communicate about the interview**

Give the interviewee a clear idea about the interview process. While the
interviewee might know how many rounds of interview they might attend. Give them
a clear picture of what to expect in the interview. Will it be a DS/Algorithm
round, or Problem-solving. This would help the candidate in preparing for the
interview.

Make sure you tell them if they are expected to bring a laptop. Or any other
tools you might want them to bring(or have).

**Don't be biased**

If your peers have already taken previous rounds of interviews, avoid getting
reviews from them. This might give a bias on how you conduct the interview.

It could also be that you know that the person you are interviewing. You know
that they are a good fit for the role but they are not performing well in the
interview. So you might be a bit biased to give them a pass. There might be
other good candidates but they were also not performing well in the interview.
In such scenarios, try not to be biased. But also try to improve your interview
process such that this performance anxiety isn't costing some a job.

## During the interview

**Start with easy to answer question**

Start the interview with some easy questions. Something they will be able to
answer. Starting the interview with the right answer will give them a confidence
booster. You could ask some basic questions from your domain or it could also be
some questions on what they are working on currently.

There might be instances where they would have prepared some monologue to start
the interview with. Sometimes when I ask them about their current project, they
start answering with "What all they have worked in thier career". It's okay,
don't penalise. Make sure this behaviour of not answering your question isn't
repeated during the interview.

**Help them to complete the solution**

Sometimes candidates might get stuck. Try to help them with some hints. But
sometimes, they might get stuck in something critical and helping them would
mean almost giving the solution out. So if they solve it now, it might be of any
use to you. Even then try to help them. This would help them in having some
confidence while attempting the next question.

**Ask similar questions to everyone**

Avoid asking very different questions to candidates interviewing for the same
role. It would be difficult for you to judge if you asked different questions.
That doesn't mean you have to ask exactly the same question. You can start with
same questions and then have different variations based on what the candidate is
comfortable with.

## Post interview

**Write down what happened immediately**

Write down what happened in the interview immediately after you are done. Though
you can take notes during the interview, I prefer writing them down post the
interview. Taking notes during the interview might distract me or the candidate.
This would also help you in being unbiased.

**Have your opinion**

Before you discuss the candidate's performance, make sure you have your point of
view. You can be persuaded by your peers or you can persuade your peers. But
Before you discuss, it is good to have your opinion.

**Let us try to make the interview experience a bit better**
