---
title: "Do we need a State Management Library With React?"
date: "2020-12-01T18:30:00.000Z"
description: "Know your state before you choose a library to manage it!"
---

Every React application starts with a task of figuring out which state
management to be used. Most of the tutorials we see, is `React + Redux` or
`React + <state management library>`. Initially, `Context API` was not great and
it wasn’t “Stable”. So generally it was advised not to be used directly. A most
common problem faced by developers then was sharing state between components.
Redux did solve that problem. But as React progressed, `Context` became very
stable and simple to use. And hooks made sharing state with application logic
much simpler. But we are still solving sharing state as we did before i.e. by
using state management libraries.

Before we try to answer “Which state management library should we use?“. Let’s
answer: What are the kinds of state we have? What library should we use? **Do we
need a State Management Library With React?**

### Kinds of state

**Server ~~State~~ Cache**

We would need something to handle the management of the server cache. It should
be able to do things like `prefetching`, `pagination`, `optimistic updates` etc.

Standard state management library wouldn't be able to handle these operations.
We would need something that specializes in managing server cache.

In most cases, this kind of state would be **70%** of all the Application State.

**Local Application State**

This is the rest of the state, we would have after server cache is taken care
of. This would most likely be "Is the modal open", "Changes to form by user",
and few other things that are the state that only client should handle.

In most of the applications, this state would account for 30% of the Application
State. In case, if this kind of state is quite large in your application then
you would require a state management library.

Since we know what kind of data it is, let's look for appropriate library to
maintain server cache.

### Server Cache Management

It would be great to use libraries made to handle the server cache.
[React Query](https://github.com/tannerlinsley/react-query) is one of the best
solutions we have right now. It can do things like `prefetching`, `pagination`,
`optimistic updates` etc.

No state management would provide such functionality, as they are focused on
solving state management, not server cache. It is better to have a dedicated
library to handle this problem, otherwise you will complicate APIs or lot of
boilerplate to get a simple task done.

Other solutions would be to use libraries like
[SWR](https://github.com/vercel/swr), or a custom hook that handles API
requests.

Since we have figured out how to handle server cache, let's see how we can
manage rest of the state.

### Local Application State Management

Few things to consider before you choose a particular state management library
are:

- **How much of your data needs to shared across app?** Having a user's
  information in your header isn't sharing data across the component. In this
  case, only your header component needs to know about the user state. Or it
  could be some authorization information. If the authorization info just needs
  to be in the router component then it need not be shared across the
  application.

  If there aren't a lot of data that needs to be shared and they don't get
  updated that often, we are good with
  [Context API](https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html). Almost **70-80%** of the
  application would fall into this category.

  Kent talks more about how to achieve most out of your application using just
  context in his blog
  [Application State Management with React](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/application-state-management-with-react/).

- **How often is the shared data updated?** We would have to figure out how many
  times does the state gets updated. User's information would only be changed
  when the profile gets updated or when a user logs in/out. So that would be
  infrequent.

  If you have a lot of global states (try to avoid), you might need some better
  way to share data across the application. Context API would be able to do
  this, but at some scale, you need to do some kind of performance optimization.
  Libraries like [zustand](https://github.com/pmndrs/zustand) do this well.

- **How many components should know when data is updated?** When a shared state
  gets updated, does your entire app needs to know that it updated or just a few
  components?

If a state needs to be shared only across a page, then share it across the page,
not the whole app. Co-locate the state. The state should be at the lowest tree
node where it is required. We can always pull up the state when required.
Context API would work for us.

If your shared state can be sliced i.e. shared data is made up of smaller
slices, and update happens to a slice of data and a few corresponding components
need to be updated. That would mean you have a lot of state updates and only
part of the application needs to be updated. Then look into
[jotai](https://github.com/pmndrs/jotai) or [recoil](https://recoiljs.org/).
These libraries are for a very specific use case. Let me repeat it, most
applications won't need this.

- **Does your application has complex flow control?** All applications will have
  some kind of flow control, but do you have a complex one? Can it not be
  handled by reducers?

  This would mean you might need some kind of State Machines to handle the
  transition between states of the application. Would prevent the application
  from being in an impossible state. For eg. Authenticated user in a
  registration form. There should be more cases than this to introduce a state
  machine in your application. [Xstate](https://xstate.js.org/) is a popular
  choice for state machine in frontend applications.

### Conclusion

In most of the application, we don't need any state management library. You
would be much better off with React's State and Context API.

When you work on your application, you should ask "Do I need a state management
library?" instead of "Which state management library should I use?"
